---
layout: post
title: Keep on truckin' Sonic.net
tags:
- sonic
- usenet
---

I've mentioned in the past how absolutely in love with
[Sonic.net](http://sonic.net) I am. They're by far the best ISP I've ever
encountered and treat their users, especially technical ones, very well.

Being a Sonic.net customer, I've always enjoyed the fact that they run a USENET
server (`news.sonic.net`) which I've used as my news server of choice since
discovering it. In addition to running a news server, there's actually a number
of Sonic.net-specific news groups under the `sonic.*` namespace, which is also
pretty neat.


Understandably, Sonic.net CEO [Dane Jasper](http://twitter.com/dane) is
urging people to switch from these `sonic.*` newsgroups to use Sonic.net's new
forums because the news servers at Sonic.net are **old** and they are no longer
going to invest in the infrastructure for less than *400 subscribers* that use
the USENET service.


As can be expected, when any amount of change occurs, gnashing of teeth from
this very vocal < 400 subscribers ensued. What happened next was what makes me
respect Dane as a CEO but also continue to love Sonic.net.


Dane was **honest** his customers. He explained the history of the
`news.sonic.net` servers, the investment that Sonic.net has made in them and
why they can no longer justify the cost. Along with other newsgroup members, he
also suggested a number of alternative services who specialize in USENET,
including free ones like [eternal-september.org](http://eternal-september.org).

To expect a company to bear the major cost of a very niche service for its
users is absurd, but I think many other companies can learn from Dane's example
and communicate openly and clearly with their customers why certain things are
happening and suggest alternatives, etc.


Kudos Sonic.net.

