---
layout: post
title: I may have killed a spider
tags:
- miscellaneous
---

Our fancy new apartment, the [one with the new
oven](/2011/06/11/the-smoke-detector-works.html), has two full-sized bed rooms
and to full size bathrooms. We have one bathroom we shower and brush our teeth
in, and one bathroom adjacent to the "office." The second bathroom really just
allows me a place to take a leak during late-night hack sessions in the
"office," without waking EC.

It's a nice set up, I recommend it.


Last night, while spacing out (while taking a leak) I notice a run-of-the-mill
slighty furry little black spider up near the ceiling. The spider was just
hanging out, probably spacing out just like I was. The bathroom isn't tiny, but
it certainly wasn't big enough for the two of us. I decided against just
smacking him with a paper towel, as the chances I would fall off the counter
and severely injure myself were too high at that time of night.

I grabbed the bug spray from underneath the kitchen sink, which is where I
assume all households without children keep their toxins, and waltzed back to
the bathroom. In preparing for my attack, I stared directly at and inspected
the nozzle of the sprayer to make sure it sprayed the right way, briefly
contemplating how difficult it would be to explain to my wife why I was
screaming and flushing water through my eyes in the sink, should I somehow
trigger the spray. Like inspecting the barrel of your own gun by peering down
it, it was a near-Darwin Award waiting to happen.


Combating household insects is serious business, and as such I took the ready
position.

The spray didn't _look_ like it hit him directly but the spider did fall from the
ceiling immediately; to be thorough I sprayed where he *was* on the ceiling for
a good two seconds before calling off the attack.


I've yet to find the body, a dime-sized shriveled up spider carcas, which means
one of two things:

1. I didn't kill him, and now he knows what I look like.
1. I did kill him, and something else, something bigger already disposed of the body


Either way, I might just stick to the other bathroom for now.

----
