---
layout: post
title: A month working at Lookout
tags:
- lookout
- apture
---

About a month ago I changed jobs, leaving [Apture](http://www.apture.com) to
join a start-up in a completely different space: [Lookout,
Inc.](http://www.mylookout.com). While I won't delve too deeply into my reasons
for leaving, my reasons for *joining* were almost entirely driven by the team.
I was fortunate enough to meet with [Kevin](http://twitter.com/dropalltables)
and [John](http://twitter.com/johnhering) (CTO and CEO respectively) through a
mutual friend and some time after that [Dave
G.](http://twitter.com/davegolombek), the tech lead for the server team. The
more people I met from Lookout, the more I wanted to work there.

Unlike both Apture and Slide, Lookout is a [Ruby](http://ruby-lang.org) shop
which has presented a number of new and interesting challenges for me, most of
which I'll enumerate as the months go on. At this point, I must say the Python
community has much that they/we could learn from subsections of the Ruby
community. There seems to be an underlying ethos amongst Ruby hackers to make
things simple and easier if possible, taking advantage of some of the unique
features of the language to acheive this.

When I first mentioned this on Twitter, I felt very flattered that multiple
people mentioned that they were "sure I would start up my thing after Apture."
In my own opinion, I still have **much** to learn before I would feel confident
pitching potential investors and building a team from scratch. Founders are in
it for the long-haul, and as such I think they should be 100% committed to
making the product and team successful. I'm not there yet, but I'll be there
soon.

