---
layout: post
title: Pairing with the fourth wall
tags:
- programming
- voyeurism
- justintv
---

Some time ago I found myself captivated by watching another developer work. Not
anybody that I work with or know in person, but the infamous
[Notch](https://twitter.com/notch). Throught some twist of fate I stumbled
across a live stream of [his](http://www.twitch.tv/notch/) and spent a
non-trivial amount of time watching boxes and code fly by in Eclipse.

Inspired, I figured I would try out the same set up on my own. The first major
hurdle to overcome was actually *streaming* my desktop to
[Justin.tv](http://justin.tv/agentdero). After a full evening of searching, and tinkering
with `ffmpeg`, I managed to get [this
script](https://gist.github.com/3495063#file_screenstream.sh) working well
enough to send audio and video across the internets.


With the "infrastructure" figured out, I started hosting a couple of sessions
while I worked on projects that I'm passionate about. I found the live coding
concept immediately useful when I managed to get live help from an engineer at
[Puppet Labs](http://puppetlabs.com) while I dug through the `Puppet::AST`
parsing code.

Taking the experiment further, I even tried helping some folks on IRC with
"live support sessions" which were so fruitful that I posted a couple videos
([1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZaF6tMGI0Ps&feature=plcp),
[2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SÂ¸OHZ74KI&feature=plcp)) from them. In the
office, I can say "hey, come over here and look at this" when others need help,
and the live coding stream allowed me to extend that concept to practically
anybody I wished to help.


I haven't helped anybody in a few months now, I use my typically viewer-less
sessions to help me focus on a single project. Whenever I turn the stream on,
I'm pair-programming with a companion who may or may not be there (considering
the `#codingwithrtyler` channel on Freenode is generally empty, I'm guessing
there's nobody watching), but I focus just as if I had another engineer sitting
next to me.

It's almost like a weird hybrid of pair programming and [rubber duck
debugging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rubber_duck_debugging) now that I
think about it.


The projects I work are not nearly as visually pleasing as Minecraft, and I
don't have the geek fame that Notch has but I'm perfectly content to stream [my
desktop](http://justin.tv/agentdero) to zero viewers as long as it proves
useful for evening and weekend hack-sessions.
