---
layout: post
title: "Making my own mistakes at 650ft"
tags:
- aviation
- flying
- solo
- vfrstudentpilot
---

This past weekend I went flying twice, something I've not yet done. Usually I
only fly Saturdays because my instructor takes Sundays off, but this weekend I
was on my own, allowing me to fly both days.

My instructor had cleared me to practice solo pattern work at
[Hayward](http://www.airnav.com/airport/KHWD) (KHWD), with certain weather
restrictions. On Saturday, the plan was to see how the weather conditions were
shaping up, if they were favorable I would work solo, otherwise we would
continue with our backup plan of a dual lesson.

Fortunately the weather was within my restrictions, and I decided to go up on
my own to fly in circles. "Exercise good judgement" my instructor said as I
prepped for the flight. Unlike my previous solo work, he wouldn't be joining me
for a pre-flight and warm-up; the success or failure of my flight would be
wholly based on my judgement and abilities.

With the appropriate gate codes, I pulled through the gate at the south-east
end of the field, and drove towards the green ramp where the [Ugly
Duckling](http://www.flickr.com/photos/agentdero/8675165949/) awaited. The
excitement of my first solo was one thing, but the excitement and anxiousness
that accompanied me while I pre-flighted the plane *alone*, was a different
story.

Winds were 8 knots at 260; I double checked on my whiz-wheel what the
cross-wind component was before I even finished my pre-flight. Currently I have
a 7 knot cross-wind restriction, and I've had some tough lessons in the past
with cross-winds. As I stepped into the cockpit, I slid the whiz-wheel in the
pocket by my left leg so I could periodically check my cross-winds between
landings and take-offs.

"Hayward ground, cessna seven-three-seven-golf-mike, student pilot, solo, at
the green ramp, request taxi to two-eight-left with information x-ray"

"*Seven-three-seven-golf-mike, taxi via alpha for two-eight-left*"


Off I putted towards the run-up area, alone. Running through my taxi
checklists, and subsequently my run-up checklists, talking through each item to
the empty right seat, with a nervous pit in my stomach.

With clearance from tower, the Ugly Duckling and I centered up on the runway
and took to the sky.

----

The first landing wasn't too bad! Right of centerline, not too soft, but not
too hard either. Battling the mild cross-wind on final approach proved
more challenging than I thought it would be. Maintaining centerline, dipping
the upwind wing to battle some of the drift, slight changes in the wind
velocity, lots going on at once.

I ended up going wings level before the main wheels touched down, which likely
caused my drift over towards the right.

Second landing was almost the same story, with some side-loading because I
didn't work the rudder enough to keep my momentum totally aligned with the
runway.


Third, and  fourth circuits I ended up performing go-arounds. The cross-wind, and my handling thereof were ending up in sloppy approaches.

Fifth time around, the wind had picked up. I ended up only
using 10 degrees of flaps on final approach instead of the 20 degrees from the
previous two attempts, and managed to land with some floating, feeling for the
runway again.

As I taxiing back to start of 28L, I called tower and asked for current wind
conditions. 11 knots from 260. After consulting my whiz-wheel, I decided the
cross-wind component was too close to my limit.

"Hayward Tower, cessna seven-three-seven-golf-mike, I'm going to go ahead and
terminate"

"*Seven-three-seven-golf-mike, cross 28L to alpha, contact ground point four*."


My day was over; I wasn't happy about it.

----


On Sunday, the weather was looking great with some light and variable winds.
Just as the day before, I picked up the flight binder and a headset from the
office, let my car into the gate, and parked in front of the Ugly Duckling.

Same routine as the day prior, pre-flight, whiz-wheel in the side pocket, same
call-up to Ground, and off I was, putting along towards the run-up area for
28L.


Unlike the day prior however, the winds were calm enough to permit lots of
practice circuits before calling it a day.


On one circuit, I had to extend my downwind to accomodate a banner towing
plane, resulting in a longer than usual final approach which allowed me to
focus on my speed. My only greaser of the day; with speed properly dialed in, it's
far easier to set a plane down gently.


On a subsequent circuit, a [Beech
Starship](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beechcraft_Starship) was holding short
of 28L while I approached. A beautiful plane, which I had no time to admire as
I flared too early, sunk a bit, crammed the power and went around.


A couple more circuits and I was finished for the day, not due to weather but
rather because I was getting tired. 8 circuits, 7 landings and 1.3 hours of
running Ugly Duckling's engine, a good day's work.

----


Acting as pilot-in-command without my instructor watching from the ground, even
if it's only for flying in circles around Hayward at 650ft, is pretty exciting.

After dropping the binder off in the office and chatting for a bit, I walked to
the car with my sunglasses on, boost in my step, feeling like a pilot.

A pilot who's nearly at the bottom of the ladder experience-wise, with
thousands of hours of experience to gain ahead of me, but still, at least I'm
on the ladder now.
