---
layout: post
title: "Floating over imaginary sod"
tags:
- aviation
- flying
---

Wiping the crud from my sleepy 6am eyes, I shut off my alarm and grab my tablet
off the nightstand. As is becoming increasingly common, my days are starting
with weather before I even leave the bed. I open up the forecast for Hayward:
clear skies, winds at 0 knots.


"*Shit*, I have to wake up now"


My desire to fly, and desire to sleep are at odds with one another during these
critical early morning minutes. Grumpy for no good reason, I throw my junk into
the car to drive down to Hayward.


---

On the menu for today in
[738VU](http://www.flickr.com/photos/agentdero/9169914387/) is a lesson full of
nothing but short-field take-offs/landings, and soft-field take-offs/landings.
Staying in the pattern makes for a very productive lesson thanks to Haywards
unique low pattern altitudes.


Pre-flight complete, and into the cockpit we go. Turning the appropriate knobs,
flipping some switches and the engine start checklist is complete, I enter
Hayward's frequencies into the Garmin and make my initial full call up from
parking to Hayward Tower.

I realize my mistake before Tower even responds.

"Hayward Tower, Seven Three Eight VIctor Uniform contact ground point four"

Damnit. My instructor smirks, his silence has paid dividends, he saw the
mistake coming from a mile away.

Every time I get a little too yeah-i'm-a-pilot-neener-neener confident, some
minor mistake brings me back down to earth where I'm still just an error-prone
student pilot.

"Hayward *Ground*, Cessna Seven Three Eight Victor Uniform at the green ramp
with information xray, request taxi to Two Eight Right"

Clearance from ground received we putter off towards the run-up area for 28R.

---

My first soft-field take-off I act too timidly with the rudder pedals,
resulting in us gaining our speed left of centerline, before climbing out.

Coming around in the circuit, as was the case the day before, my circuit is
sloppy as is my approach. A go-around ensued as a result, I seem to have a
habit of needing at least one crappy circuit in order to relax enough to tune
everything in for the next time around.

<center><img
src="http://agentdero.cachefly.net/unethicalblogger.com/images/soft-field-landing.jpg"
alt="Soft field landing" width="800"/></center>

Coming around again, the circuit is crisper, the approach isn't terrible but a
little right cross-wind (seriously, very little) nudges me left. My hyperfocus
on the "soft-field" part of "soft-field landing" kicks in and we end up finding
the runway left of centerline with a moderate jostling.


I don't know if they ever name runways after people, but if they do, I hope
they name the left half of 28R after me for all the time I've spent there.
That'd be a real nice gesture.


Over the next few circuits I start to hone in on a proper soft-field landing.
My instructor is satisfied so we switch over to practicing short-field
landings.


Soft-field is all about putting the plane down as gently as possible,
short-field is all about precision landing, and stopping the plane. Meaning
my habit of floating in ground effect for 500ft down the runway had to be
eliminated, my power needed to be reigned in on final approach, and I had to
get over my worry of hitting the grass leading up to 28R.

The approach to 28R feels all wrong visually, you cross a big 30ft tree, a
big street, the parking lot behind California Airways, what feels like an
eternity's worth of run-up area, some grass and then *finally* the runway
starts (you can see for yourself [in this
video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=brquAtMjNGE&t=101)).

I always feel too low, so I carry power on my final, which causes prolonged
float during the landing flare.

We worked through that however, and towards the end of the lesson I was
crossing the big tree with my power to idle, allowing me to put the plane down
pretty much right on the numbers. It took 4 or 5 tries to get speed, power,
glide slope and my head all working in concert correctly, but before the lesson
was up, I think I was getting it.

---

Putting in a good, productive lesson feels great, and helps ensure that
"flying" always wins over "sleeping in" on mornings when I have lessons
scheduled.

With the basics of soft-field and short-field work there, I can now come back
over the weekend and start gaining more experience with the techniques by
flying the pattern solo for a bit.


