---
layout: post
title: "Reports of Quacking over Danville"
tags:
- aviation
- flying
- vfrstudentpilot
---


After a long week of entirely fogged in mornings, and therefore no flying,
today was just about as *perfect* as it could possibly be. Unfortunately my
instructor was all booked, but that didn't prevent me from going for a flight
by myself.


The "twist" for today's lesson was that I would be departing the pattern above
Hayward and flying around in the Mt. Diablo practice area commonly used by the
flight school.


After hanging around the school for a bit, eating my lunch and shooting the
shit for a bit, I drove through the gate and down to pre-flight.


My current pre-flight procedure includes checking the fuel before anything
else, today this pattern finally paid off.  While the fuel truck filled up [Ugly
Duckling](http://www.flickr.com/photos/agentdero/8920019697/), I finished up my
inspection.


Instead of heading towards 28L, I taxied towards 28R and took off heading east
towards Mount Diablo.

<img
src="http://agentdero.cachefly.net/unethicalblogger.com/images/danville-sectional.png"
align="right" alt="Danville"/>


Passing Lake Chabot, I climb to 3000ft, go through my climb checklist and start
to ponder how I'm going to perform the manuevers I set out to perform. As I
crossed the hills, I see a plane turning about 20 miles straight ahead.
"Damnit" I think to myself, traffic means more stress in my head while I
practice.


I performed a few clearing 360 turns to double-check for more traffic, and
started setting up for some slow flight manuevers over I-680. As I slowed to
around 60 knots, I became a bit uneasy with my situation. Hadn't flown in a
week, was by myself and things felt *slow.* I decided that I'd get to
slow-flight later after I got more comfortable by myself.

Generally I found myself "playing around" more than not. Ground reference
manuevers, climbing and descending turns, forward slips, side-slips, and of
course slow flight.

With a good 10-15 knot wind at altitude, taking advantage of the situation I
started to perform practice patterns, and approaches to runways which didn't
exist. On previous lessons I had trouble with cross-wind approaches. I was
determined to get the cowl lined up on my fake centerline, and get a feel for
how much drift and rudder stomping was necessary to perform a good cross-wind
landing.


Satisfied with my hour's worth of work, I started picking out landmarks to make
sure I took the right track towards Hayward. I could see Livermore, Mount
Diablo, and I-680 from the cockpit. "But which cities are these stupid ones
down here?" I grumble to myself, glancing back and forth between the windshield
and my chart. Gazing westward and I was able to pick out the San Mateo Bridge,
and start pointing the nose towards Hayward.


My approach and entry to Hayward's airspace was near flawless, and I entered
a right base approach for 28R. All my solo work has been on 28L, the giant mile
long runway, I haven't actually landed on the puny 28R in a while.


Carb heat on, gas on both, undercarriage present, mixture rich, prop is there,
seatbealts on, landing clearance received.

Lined up, speed looking good, flaps lowered to 20 degrees. I fly over the grass
speeding towards 28R, start my flare, my airspeed slows, I keep pulling back, staring at
the end of the runway, I keep pulling back and the wheels gently touch down
shortly past the numbers, right on the centerline.

On previous lessons, I felt excited about the pattern work and the plethora of
landings performed. On this lesson, I felt excited about **one** landing, it
was exhilarating.

----


Flying is **fun**, I can't recommend it enough. Tomorrow I'll be going up
again, for the first time in almost two weeks, I won't be alone.




