---
layout: post
title: "12 months of burning avgas"
tags:
- aviation
- flying
- vfrstudentpilot
---

One year ago today, my wife and I made the drive down to Hayward for the first
time to take an introductory flight/bay tour with California Airways. My
scheduled instructor for the flight was busy, and so another instructor picked
up the flight.

In the past twelve months, I've received 50 flight hours of instruction from
him, and racked up nearly 15 hours of solo time myself, all in the pursuit of
a private pilot's license.

[![Before the first flight](http://farm9.staticflickr.com/8043/8083598598_10d4
9117ef.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/agentdero/8083598598/)

**Before our first flight**

* * *

Running late this morning, I pushed my right foot, and my luck as I sped
towards Hayward. The weather wasn't flyable when I woke up, but it was
clearing up fast, and I wanted to get as much work in as possible.

The plane, 733PV, that I had intended to take out went "off-roading" the day
prior and was off the flight line until it could be inspected for non-obvious
damage. This put me in 172CA for my morning work, and likely for my checkride.
A year to the day, I would be taking the same plane into the air. Unlike last
October 13th, this time I would be pre-flighting, taxiing, taking-off and
landing, all by myself.

* * *

Pre-flight complete, I wiggle into the cockpit and start to adjust the seat.
There's a pit in my stomach, but not one of anxiety that has typically marked
my solo flights, it is a pit of agitation. With only a few hours before my
checkride, I was switching planes _again_, and thanks to the weather, I
wouldn't have enough time to head out to
[Livermore](http://airnav.com/airport/klvk) to practice.

With the engine cautiously coming to life, I'm almost immediately in better
spirits. I've noticed that external stresses tend to melt away once I'm
sitting behind the yoke. The engine running means it's time to fly, and until
I shutdown and tie-down the plane, none of the other bullshit matters.

"Hayward Tower, Skyhawk One-seven-two Charlie-alpha at the green ramp with
November, request taxi to Two-eight rig..uh, two-eight left."

* * *

Completing my run-up, I mosey towards the hold-short line for 28L, going over
my departure review for my invisible instructor in the right seat.

"All right, we'll be staying in the pattern today so any engine failure on the
runway before rotation and we'll go power to idle, maintain centerline, brake
straight ahead and exit the runway once we've reached taxiing speed.

Any failure after rotation in the upwind or cross-wind legs and we'll be
landing within 30 degrees of the nose.

Any failure in downwind, base or final, and we're landing back at the
airport."

I laugh at myself and the fake-airline-captain voice I found myself using for
the departure review, and call up Tower.

Take-off clearance received, I push the flaps to 10, yank the yoke back and
slowly roll onto the runway: soft-field take-off to start us out.

* * *

Once airborn, Tower informs me that until 10am touch-and-go's are prohibited
for noise abatement so I'll need to perform full-stop landings. Fine by me! I
need to practice short-field landings anyways.

Coping with the fast and low pattern at Hayward usually leads me to make
circuits that look more like elongated ovals with straight sides as opposed to
rectangles. By the time I've finished turning base, it's already time to turn
final! In order to stay ahead of the airplane, I find myself performing my
CGUMPS checklist half at the very end of downwind, and half after completing
the turn to base.

My headset has been very quiet for this first circuit as I turn final I click
the radio

"Hayward Tower, 172CA, am I cleared for 28L?"

"172CA, Hayward Tower, 28L cleared to land."

I must have caught somebody dozing off at the scope. I neglected to descend
much, and less than a mile from the threshold I decide I'll overfly the runway
and just go around.

Next circuit, my headset is being quiet again, so I decide to politely nudge
the Tower.

"One-seven-two Charlie-alpha, turning base"

"172CA, Hayward Tower, 28L cleared to land."

On final I get my airspeed down, and continue my descent. Runway widens, the
sound of air rushes past the windscreen, the stall warning horn starts crying
and the mains gently touch down. Once the nose touches the pavement, my feet
slide up to the brakes at the top of the pedals. If I'm going to have to make
full-stop landings, I'm going to make sure I get the first taxiway every time
around.

Taxiing back to the start of 28L, I look at my watch, 9:00am. I've got another
50 minutes before I'm done.

* * *

I alternate between short-field take-offs and landings, and soft-field take-
offs and landings. I'm not sure if everything is up to my instructor's
requirements, but I'm quite pleased with my consistency and improvements in
speed management.

On circuit five or six, a new controller's voice comes on the radio while I'm
in my downwind leg.

"[17]2CA, 28L cleared for the options"

Being cleared for the options means you can perform full-stop landings or
touch-and-go's, I know it's not 10am yet, so I ask "Hayward Tower, 172CA, just
checking, you're clearing me for the options?" "Affirmative."

I debated whether or not I should ask about the noise abatement, but figured
he must have cleared me for some _reason_, and besides, avgas is expensive and
I've only got this bird for another 30 minutes.

Touch-and-go it is!

A soft-field landing later, I'm back in the air. In my downwind leg, the
controller jumps back on the radio

"Two-charlie-alpha, 28L, cleared to _land_"

After the readback he explains "Sorry, I forgot about the noise-abatement,
full-stop until 10am" "Roger" is the only reply I can let off before I start
laughing in the cockpit.

Perhaps I should feel bad for those spoil-sports whose mornings I interrupted
at the end of the runway, but the airport has been there over 60 years, so I
think they knew what they were getting into.

* * *

Running out of time, I terminate and return to the green ramp to shutdown and
secure the aircraft. My instructor's words "be quick, but don't rush" go
through my head as I jog around the plane tying it down, only a couple minutes
before the next scheduled flight in 172CA, and I still need to run the binder
down to the office!

Despite my haste, I still stop to take a photo of the plane that started it
all one year ago.

<center><a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/agentdero/10257275714/"
title="172CA after pattern work by agentdero, on Flickr"><img
src="http://farm9.staticflickr.com/8139/10257275714_2b44a2fede.jpg" width="500"
height="375" alt="172CA after pattern work"></a><br/><b>Charlie-Alpha after our
morning exercises</b></center>
