---
layout: post
title: "Getting beat up in San Ramon"
tags:
- aviation
- flying
- vfrstudentpilot
---

_Note:_ I half-finished this blog post, I'm posting it as such. I ended up
becoming so busy I didn't write for over a week, and now I can barely remember
what I ended up doing, other than getting beat up by the wind.

* * *

Saturday I headed down to Hayward to prepare for my checkride with some ground
work with my instructor, followed by solo manuevers in the practice area. As
luck would have it, Hayward was covered in clouds, preventing my departure.

Frustrated, I headed back home in a down pour the likes of which are not
common in the East Bay.

I reserved a plane to take out the following day, Sunday, to ensure that I
would at least fly _once_ over the weekend. Due to my checkride preparation, I
had skipped flying the Tuesday prior, and had my knowledge tested on the
ground instead.

I was eager to fly again.

* * *

My wife needed the car for some errands, so I was dropped off at the office
almost a whole hour before my scheduled departure time. This left me plenty of
time to get a weather briefing, watch planes land and stress out about my
flight.

Nothing out of the ordinary there.

What ended up being out of the ordinary is that my plane was late returning
from its previous reservation. Things like this happen, but in the 30 minutes
delay, I became more and more worried that I wasn't going to have a plane, and
wasn't going to get to fly. The stress of a solo flight is something I'm used
to, but the stress of not flying is not something I want to accomodate myself
to, especially so close to my checkride.

Fortunately my plane arrived, and I walked down to the flight line to
preflight.

* * *

The usual pre-flight complete, I squeezed myself into the cockpit of 738VU and
started tuning my chair for the optimal position.

Was it three notches back on the ground track, or two? I can't remember. When
I pull myself too close, the yoke hits me in my gangly legs when I put a full
left or right aileron deflection in. Three notches back, and I feel like the
panel is too far away from me. Perhaps the seat-back isn't far enough forward.

The Ugly Duckling didn't have any knobs on the seat, only forward and reverse,
simple. This plane is weird; I can't seem to get comfortable. I wonder if this
will affect my ability to manuever effectively.

The things I worry about prior to a solo flight.

* * *

I pump the primer three times, shout out the open window "clear prop!", count
to three and then turn the key. 738VU growls but doesn't catch for a few
seconds, until I start pumping the throttle. I catch it and bring it back to
1000rpm, and then continue with my Engine Start Checklist.

This panel still feels like it's too far away from me.

Engine Start Checklist complete, I call up Ground:

"_Hayward Ground, Seven-three-eight Victor-Uniform at the green ramp with
Papa, request taxi to Two-eight Left._"

Cleared to taxi, I start putting my way towards 28L to perform my run-up.

Everything looking good, I roll up to hold short line, call Tower and lower
the flaps to ten degrees for my soft-field take-off.

* * *

Turning right over the golf course, I head towards the Mount Diablo practice
area. As I depart Hayward's airspace, I call up NorCal Approach to request
traffic advisory service before I perform my practice.

By the time I arrived over San Ramon, the mild turbulence in the air made
itself known. Climbing towards 5000ft for my work, I become aware of the
clouds scattered over the area and arrest my ascent around 4000ft.

Starting through the practice program my instructor and I put together with
slow flight, I work to keep wings level with the wind bouncing me around.
Pleased with my slow flight, I work a couple power-off stalls.

Stalls straight-ahead don't worry me too much anymore, even with the wind. The
most disconcerting part of the power-off stalls was that I don't think I ever
heard the stall warning horn, I just felt the buffet and decided to recover.


