---
layout: post
title: "Free Balloon Rides at Half Moon Bay"
tags:
- aviation
- flying
- vfrstudentpilot
---


Afternoon flight lessons are always an interesting experience for me, both the
temperature and wind speed pick up in the afternoons; makes for fun flying.

Building on my [last lesson in
Hayward](/2013/06/20/flying-without-adult-supervision.html) where I was flying
solo in Hayward's pattern, my instructor wanted to go elsewhere and solo there.
After briefly considering [Livermore](http://airnav.com/airport/KLVK), which
was at 102F (38C), we decided to head westward towards [Half Moon
Bay](http://airnav.com/airport/KHAF) (KHAF), an airport that has not yet graced my
logbook.


I have flown in the *direction* of Half Moon Bay before, but never set wheels
down there. Similar to my previous [trip to
Tracy](/2013/06/18/searching-for-centerline-in-tracy.html), KHAF is an
uncontrolled airport, adding extra radio work and traffic awareness to my game
plan.


<a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/agentdero/9169914387/" title="N738VU by
agentdero, on Flickr"><img
src="http://farm6.staticflickr.com/5452/9169914387_03d53697b6_n.jpg"
width="320" height="240" alt="N738VU" align="right"></a>

Instead of the usual Ugly Duckling, today we flew with N738VU, a similarly
lesser-utilized airplane in the California Airways fleet.

When taking off from Hayward (KHWD) my instructor decides to show me a
soft-field take-off which is unlike anything I've seen or done before. A normal
take-off roll has the plane accelerating down the runway until the point of
rotation, wherein you maintain a steady climb out. In a soft-field take-off,
you get the plane off the ground as soon as possible, but keep it in [ground
effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ground_effect_in_aircraft) for a while,
until airspeed increases enough to begin a normal climb out. It's a neat
manuever.

As we head towards [San Carlos Airport](http://airnav.com/airport/KSQL)
(KSQL) our radio starts experiencing some weird feedback. Not a big deal,
everything is loud and clear on our secondary comms, so we switch over for the
remainder of the flight.

----

As we start to enter the pattern for KHAF, my instructor makes sure to point
out the hills which are "right there" and can (apparently) mess with some
students' heads when flying the pattern at KHAF. For me this was the least of
my worries, I never even stressed about the terrain. The terrain wasn't going
to fly up and hit me, the other pilots flying in and out of the airfield
could though.

The first few landings with my instructor improve enough to where he feels
comfortable with my radio work, and landings to step out of the plane. Unlike
my first solo, it felt far more natural to be in the plane by myself. As if
I've done it a hundred times already, I was just going up for some pattern
work, no bigs.

Back up in the air I go, execute a circuit and come in for final approach. The
wind is around 10-12 knots, and I have [full
flaps](http://answersforpilots.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2010/04/flaps.jpg)
in, making my approach more wobbly than I'm comfortable with, especially as I
get closer to the runway. *Go around.*

My next approach is a bit better, I didn't go full (30) degrees of flaps for
this approach, left it at 20 degrees. Not because I directly connected my
wobbly-ness to the amount of flaps, but with the stronger winds, I just didn't
think I needed full flaps this time around.

I cross the threshhold, pull the power back, level the attitude, stomp around a
bit on the rudder to keep centerline and start feeling for the runway.
**Thud.** Left of centerline, not by too much, but by too much to be happy with
the landing, especially with the thud.

Taxiing back to the start of the runway, I stop to get some quick feedback from
my instructor. "Bit wobbly because you've got those barn doors down, try 10
degrees of flaps this time, or even no flaps." With his advice in hand, I take
off again and come back around in the pattern.


On my turn from downwind to base, I descend more than I really should in the
turn. I noticed this with my [previous
lesson](/2013/06/26/fuel-injected-in-florida.html); not enough back-pressure in
my turns to maintain a good 500ft per minute descent. As I roll out of the turn
onto base, I add some power because I *know* I'm not going to be on glideslope
unless I delay my descent until I'm closer to the field. I wonder to myself if
the people in the boats below in the harbor can tell that I'm too low. They're
in boats, so it's not like their opinions matter anyways.

Centering up on final approach with a little bit extra airspeed to compensate
for the wind, 10 degrees of flaps, things are looking better. The wind has been
off-center for the past couple circuits so I am drifting a bit back and forth
to maintain centerline. I'm feeling again for the runway (**bad**) and my left
wing comes up when I don't expect it to, my right main wheel touches down,
**thud**. Then my *nose* wheel touches down and finally my left main wheel
touches down.

My face is hot as I hustle off the runway and go through my after landing flow.
Once the flow is complete, I have the leeway to let the stream of expletives out
as I begin to taxi back. That was an **awful** landing, but I just don't know
why.


I stop and chat with my instructor at the starting point again. Surely the
exasperation is clear either on my face or in my tone. He hops back in, tells
me to pretend he isn't there, and do the same pattern again.

One more circuit later, I turn onto final approach and make my radio call,
another aircraft on the ground announces he's going to take the runway (who
"called it" first, I don't remember, he probably did). "You bastard" I say, and
then make the call "Half Moon Bay Traffic, white Cessna, going around, we'll be
on the right of runway 30". The other pilot apologies and says I can go ahead
and land, "too late, I'm already 400ft above you, passing on the right."

We come around again, another *thud* of a landing that I'm not happy with. I
execute a touch-and-go, and then we're off towards Hayward again.

The landing back at home wasn't spectacular either. No structural damage, and
my instructor appeared to still have circulation in his face, so it wasn't
*that* bad I suppose.

----

Today was an "off day", no doubt about it. In discussing the flight afterwards
a few key things came up that were adversely affecting my performance. When we
arrived at KHAF there was a slight cross-wind from the right of the active
runway. By the time I was flying solo however, the wind had *shifted* to
crossing the runway from the left. I did not notice this, so that **awful**
landing, I believe I was correcting for cross wind in the **wrong** direction.
Yikes.

I also learned that I really don't have a good perception of height as I near
the runway, that's why I ended up "feeling for the runway" so many times. I
just don't have a good mental gauge, something to develop and calibrate for the
next lesson.

Finally, I believe I've had a minor misunderstanding about the landing process
itself which affected me today. I've been thinking about landing as three
concrete steps: descend with the nose pointed short of your aiming point, level
off and drop power, then raise the nose and touchdown. I think the last two
steps are really supposed to be one gradual movement, and I've been treating
them as separate phases, pushing my touchdown point further down the runway
than it should be.


----

I'm still a bit frustrated with my performance today, even a few hours after
the event. The frustration is tempered by the number of things I believe I've
learned, and by the fact that it's still a *lesson* after all. If I knew how to
fly, I wouldn't need to shuttle 200lbs of instructor around with me all the
time; he's not there just for conversation it turns out.

Either way, I'll be back up there in a few days, building on today's lessons.




