---
layout: post
title: Fly until the money runs out
tags:
- aviation
- flying
---

If you were to ask me whether I wanted to fly when I was younger, I would have
said "duh", not because flight has been a life-long goal, but rather the
question struck me similar to "would you like to be a millionaire?" Of course,
who *wouldn't* want to fly? The two kinds of people who I knew as pilots
growing up were airline transport pilots, a profession I never wanted, or
insanely rich people.

<a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/agentdero/8083601010/" title="Untitled by
agentdero, on Flickr"><img
src="http://farm9.staticflickr.com/8474/8083601010_ce1b678bd4_n.jpg"
width="320" height="240" alt="Just before my intro flight" align="right"></a>

Some time last September, I was talking with one of
[Lookout's](https://www.lookout.com) advisors [Mike
Starkenburg](http://www.linkedin.com/in/mikestarkenburg), about his experience
as a pilot regularly commuting from Southern California to the bay area. In
talking with him, I realized how cheap (relatively) general aviation actually
is, and mentioned it to my wife (ET).

Last October as a gift, my ET set up a demo flight with a [flight
school](http://www.california-airways.com/)
out of [Hayward Executive Airport](http://airnav.com/airport/KHWD).

The picture to the right is a photo of me just before we took off for a bay
tour demo flight.


----

I was incredibly fortunate that my demo flight was with the man who would
ultimately become my ground school instructor, and is now my flight instructor.

I decided to do ground school, the classroom-based portion of the training *first*.

My reasoning was that if I really wanted to spend the thousands of dollars
necessary to acquire a pilot's license, I should first demonstrate, to myself
at least, the discipline to do the class work. For 6-7 weeks, I would hop on
BART and commute right after work from downtown San Francisco to Hayward for 3
hours of ground school every Monday and Wednesday. Sundays, Tuesdays and
sometimes Saturdays, I would study at home to prepare for the next lesson.

April 15th was the last day of class, and I received my log book endorsement to
take the [FAA Knowledge Test](http://www.faa.gov/pilots/testing/). Today (May
26th) I took the exam and passed with a **98%**. Bolded because I'm *over the
moon happy* about it.

----

My flight milestones list is currently:

<ul>
 <li><strong><strike>Ground School</strike></strong></li>
 <li><strong><strike>Airman Medical Exam</strike></strong></li>
 <li><strong><strike>FAA Knowledge Test</strike></strong></li>
 <li><strong>Solo Flight</strong></li>
 <li><strong>FAA Checkride for License</strong></li>
</ul>

From here out, I need to maintain my knowledge (of course) but it's really just
*flying* that I have left. That means I'm going to spend a lot of time with the
Ugly Duckling, pictured below.

<center><a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/agentdero/8675165949/"
title="Ugly Duckling by agentdero, on Flickr"><img
src="http://farm9.staticflickr.com/8387/8675165949_cbcdab831c.jpg" width="500"
height="375" alt="Ugly Duckling"></a></center>


Ugly Duckling (my name for 737GM) is the most under-appreciated plane in the flight club, which
means it's almost never checked out, so I've already put about 10 flight hours
in with it.

Despite ground school being over, I'm still making the lengthy trips to Hayward
twice a week, except now I go down to pile into a plane with my instructor to
fly towards the Mt. Diablo area for manuevers and **flying**.

It's pretty damn fun.

----


In the future I'll be blogging a lot more about my flight experiences, I didn't
want to share too much until after my written exam, due to my fear of failure.

Truth be told, this has been by far one of the most humbling experiences of my
adult life, and my fear of failing at it was/is very real. What if I fail my
medical exam? What if I fail my written exam? What if I step on the wrong
rudder during stall recovery practice? What if I screw up a cross-wind
approach?

There's a lot to lose sleep over if you're not careful.

Flight isn't for the indecisive or the over-confident, something I'm trying to
stay aware of and ride that middle ground.

I'm looking forward to the remainder of my training and many more hours/years after
that of flying.

