---
layout: post
title: "2014 European Tour"
tags:
- europe
- yurp
- fosdem
---

With low temperatures throughout the northern hemisphere, one might be tempted
to steal away to a warmer climate for a few weeks. A reasonable thought, by no
doubt reasonable people. Brazil, Australia, Iran, all decent options with
decent "winter" weather. That's not for me however, I'll be taking what my
friend [Thomson](https://twitter.com/itsthomson) would call the "comedy
option": Europe. Just as I did [last year](/2012/12/13/tyler-goes-to-yurp.html), I will be
returning to Europe for the month of February.


The make-up of the trip will be slightly different than last year's, wherein I
spent the majority of the trip working from Berlin.  This year I will be
starting my trip with a weekend in Brussels for [FOSDEM
'14](https://fosdem.org/2014) where I will be running the [Testing/Automation
devroom](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/track/testing_and_automation/) with
[Jeff Weiss](https://twitter.com/jeffweiss).

Following FOSDEM '14, I plan on swinging up to Gent for [Cfg Mgmt
Camp](http://cfgmgmtcamp.eu/) to make fun of my peers in the Ops community for
a couple days.

After I leave Belgium, things get a little fuzzy and less defined
unfortunately. While I will be spending about two weeks at the
[Lookout](https://www.lookout.com) office in London, I'm not yet certain
*which* days I'll be there.

I will however be finishing my trip on a strong note, attending [Mobile World
Congress](http://www.mobileworldcongress.com/), Feb 24-27th in Barcelona. This
year's MWC will be great, not only because I'll be in attendance but also due
to Lookout's CEO [John Hering](https://twitter.com/johnhering) giving a
[keynote](http://www.mobileworldcongress.com/keynote-speakers/).

If you're in any of the following cities, and interested in meeting up, let me
know via email and I can let you know when I've figured out a more definite
schedule:

 * Brussels (Belgium)
 * Gent (Belgium)
 * Berlin (Germany)
 * Dresden (Germany)
 * London (UK)
 * Barcelona (Spain)

---


I'm looking forward to doing as much as I can, and meeting up with as many
peoplke as possible without succumbing to frostbite or cirrhosis of the liver.

See you in Yurp!
