---
layout: post
title: "Are you German or what?"
tags:
- personal
- german
- opinion
---

Arriving for Thanksgiving this year, in my luggage I had four cookbooks that I borrowed
from a classmate along with a couple of my own. Each book contained a number of
recipes for soups, appetizers, salads, casseroles, entrees, cakes and cookies,
all from Germany and almost exclusively written in the german language. Keen to
my desire to cook german food, my wife decided that the Friday after
Thanksgiving would be my time to shine. On the yellow notebook paper which
contained the meals planned for ther next few days the heading for Friday
simply read "German Day."

---

I didn't grow up with german relatives, eating german food or with any social
or cultural ties to the nation of Germany or what you could refer to as the
germanic nations. I did take German the first three years of high school
however. Primarily because *everybody* took Spanish, French didn't interest to
me and I wasn't one of the over-acheiving, straight-A, AP-track students who
took Latin.


During my junior (third) year of high school, I was struck with a *wanderlust*
and applied for the [Congress-Bundestag Youth
Exchange Scholarship](http://www.usagermanyscholarship.org/). I did not apply to any
other exchange programs, just the one, on a whim. Despite my status as an
unremarkable student, my German teacher even wrote me a recommendation, which I
filed in with my application and sent it off before the end of the winter
semester.


I received my soft-rejection some time, I don't remember when, early in the
next year. I hadn't been outright told to get lost, but instead I was given an
"alternate" status. The program has a fixed number of slots; 60 kids each year
are given the opportunity to live for one school-year with a german host family and
attend german schools. My future rested on the possibility that some other high
school student would decline the scholarship for whatever reason.

A couple months later I got a phone call from a program coordinator to tell me
that I was "in."


### Exchange


The staging point for the 59 students and 1 alternate was in [Washington
D.C.](http://www.4hcenter.org/), a short drive away at the time. As a group we
had two days to: meet each other, our counsellors and to prepare for the trip.
The structure of the program is such that students first fly to Frankfurt and
then spend a month in T&uuml;bingen with crash-courses in German language,
culture and how to survive as an exchange student in a foreign land. Perhaps
most importantly of all, we were instructed on our role as "youth ambassadors,"
representing the US and our respective communities once we each arrived in our
different families.

Shortly after arrival in T&uuml;bingen, everybody received a letter from
their new host families. Everybody except me. As a somewhat late entrant into
the program, they had not actually finalized my placement when I set foot onto
german soil.

When I finally was placed, I received a post-card accompanying an immensely
formal picture with, maybe, 15 people in it. I was filled with anxiety and fear
about what lied ahead. (I would later learn that the photo
was of my brother's [confirmation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confirmation),
and I've never seen him dress so formally since).

To complicate matters further, I was one of four students placed in a formerly
east german state. Out of sixty students, over 90% of us went to host families
in west Germany, providing another source of anxiety.


As the month of culture shock in T&uuml;bingen came to a close, things become
slightly more complicated for me. The city I was destined for, Dresden, was
under water due to a [once in 100-year
flood](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2002_European_floods). The Elbe river,
which cuts Dresden into "Altstadt" and "Neustadt," had risen **30 feet**.
Dresden Hauptbahnhof (main station), along with much of Altstadt, was flooded.
The "usual route" to Dresden was discontinued

<center><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2002_European_floods"><img src="/images/DresdenAug2002.jpg" alt="Dresden Jahrhundertflut
(2002)" border="0"/></a></center>

The merry band of east Germany-bound exchange students and I ended up taking
slower, less direct, trains from T&uuml;bingen (south-west Germany) north, then
east, then south from Berlin to Dresden. Altogether the trip took almost 9
hours, if memory serves me.


I was the last to disembark, stepping off the train with my bag in the Dresden
Neustadt train station. Looking up and down the platform, I half-expected to
see a stern-faced welcoming party dressed in suits and fine dresses like the
picture, but nobody was there.


I stood alone, petrified. A long series of improbable events had led
me from a typical middle-class suburban life to Germany, then to Saxony and
finally to this train station and nobody was there.

The platform emptied as the other passengers with people to see and places to
go filed out of the station. After a few minutes, the train I had arrived on
departed.

"What the fuck have I done?"


Slowly turning around, I caught the gaze of an auburn haired older woman on
another platform. Her eyes opened wide, she started waving and shouted "Taylor!"


### Coswig

In this particular program, the exchange students are expected to attend school
with their host siblings. Pairing up with a host sibling helps ease the
terrified exchange student into a social circle and helps orient them into the
class schedule, structure and so on.

My (host) brother Franz went to the Mittelschule (also known as
[Realschule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Realschule)),
which is typically the track in the german educational system where pupils are
prepared for a technical or vocational career, think electricians, plumbers,
lab techs, etc. I would later learn that of the 60, I was the only exchange
student not attending
[Gymnasium](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gymnasium_(school).

I enrolled in all the same classes as Franz, with one exception, I had a German
class with the grade 6 students (aged around 11-12) who were studying grammar.
The school building was a GDR/DDR-era building, big, blocky and built entirely
out of cement. Inside were a hundred or so german students, who all
seemed to know me, the only American they had ever met.

In mid-autumn I started to experience migraines. Every day after school my head
was pounding and I felt exhausted. A side-effect of being in the eastern part
of Germany at this time, in this little town, was that _nobody_ spoke English.
I had been reading, hearing and speaking nothing but German for almost three
months nonstop. (In a mid-year meetup among exchange students we discovered
that _everybody_ had these migraines, ostensibly from working overtime to
translate everything in and out)

My dreams started to be in German.

If you've only ever spoken one language, dreaming in a different language is
perplexing to say the least. Somewhat less perplexing than what started
happening next.

My internal dialogue became primarily German.

When you point to the door, you don't think "what's the word for that..door!"
Language is the currency spent in the process of constructing conscious
thought, and when you are immersed so completely, things get funky.

In one of my rare phone calls to my parents in the US, my mom asked me what I
was doing and I replied "nothing, just looking out die Fenster" (_die Fenster_
is german for "the window").

After this conversion, the migraines subsided.

<center><a data-flickr-embed="true"  href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/agentdero/21227769732/in/album-72157656015570203/" title="Mit ein Räucherman"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/564/21227769732_b0849915cf.jpg" width="500" height="375" alt="Mit ein Räucherman"></a><p><em>Clearly ecstatic about receiving a R&auml;ucherman for Christmas</em></p></center>



### Ambassadorship

In the spring, the nation that sent me to Germany [invaded
Iraq](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iraq_War). As the sole American that the
students and teachers from my school knew, I became an involuntary diplomat
simultaneously trying to understand and defend my country's foreign policies.

In my history class up to that point, we were discussing the road to fascism
and war that Germany traveled in the mid-20th century. A number of times I was
challenged on my previously held beliefs around [American
Exceptionalism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_exceptionalism) and
watched as parallels were drawn between the usurping of executive power in the
old Weimar Republic and an eerily similar usurping of power by the executive
branch.

Seeing the dramatic actions of my country from a new and different perspective
made defending those same actions much more difficult than they might have been
the year prior.


Disenchanted from the America I had left behind, I began to feel less American.


"What does that even mean? What is it to have a national identity? I never
explicitly chose to be American, it just kind of happened to me. If I got to
choose to be "something" would I _choose_ American? Am I American just because
my family is American?"

All peculiar questions to ask yourself at 17.

Absorbing german culture, language, political ideals, I started to feel more
German.

<center><a data-flickr-embed="true"  href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/agentdero/21051090109/in/album-72157656015570203/" title="BAC Zero point too much"><img src="https://farm6.staticflickr.com/5705/21051090109_6413c6cdc6.jpg" width="375" height="500" alt="BAC Zero point too much"></a><p><em>Too much German culture</em></p></center>

---

By the end of the exchange, I had my "Germany Mutti" (her words), "Vati" and my
german brother Franz. I had a german hometown, went to a german school, visited
a german hospital (whoops), kissed german girls, rode german transit, went to
sleep german-drunk and woke up german-hungover.

To my german friends I was the American. Returning to a new school in the US, I was the German.

---

Over ten years after the exchange, I find myself expending a tremendous amount
of energy ensuring that I maintain fluency in German. Having realized that my
german parents don't speak English and if I lose the language, I lose them.

With the renewed efforts the conflict of identity returns. Do I really need to
choose?

Let's go with "German-ish."
