---
layout: post
title: "Call for Proposals: Testing and Automation @ FOSDEM 2018"
tags:
- fosdem
- testingautomation
- jenkins
---


2018 will be the sixth year for the Testing/Automation dev room at
[FOSDEM](https://fosdem.org/2016). This room is about creating better
software through a focus on testing and automation at all layers of
the stack. From creating libraries and end-user applications all the
way down to packaging, distribution and deployment. Testing and
automation is not isolated to a single toolchain, language or
platform, there is much to learn and share regardless of background!

# What

Since this is the sixth year we're hosting the Testing and Automation
dev room, here are some ideas of what we would like to see, and what
worked in prior years, they're just ideas though! Check out the
[2013](https://archive.fosdem.org/2013/schedule/track/testing_and_automation/),
[2014](https://archive.fosdem.org/2014/schedule/track/testing_and_automation/),
[2015](https://archive.fosdem.org/2015/schedule/track/testing_and_automation/),
[2016](https://archive.fosdem.org/2016/schedule/track/testing_and_automation/),
[2017](https://archive.fosdem.org/2017/schedule/track/testing_and_automation/)
schedules for inspiration.

### Testing in the real, open source world

* War stories/strategies for testing large scale or complex projects
* Tools that extend the ability to test low-level code
* Projects that are introducing new/interesting ways of testing "systems"

### Cool Tools (good candidates for lightning talks)

* Explain/demo how your open source tool made developing quality software better
* Combining projects/plugins/tools to build amazing things "Not enough
people in the open source community know how to use $X, but here's a
tutorial on how to use $X to make your project better."

# Where

FOSDEM is hosted at [Universite libre de Bruxelles in Brussels,
Belgium](https://fosdem.org/2018/practical/transportation/). The
Testing and Automation dev room is likely slated for Building H, room
2213, which seats ~100.

# When
 * CFP Submission Deadline: **23:59 UTC, 26 November 2017**
 * Schedule Announced: **15 December 2017**
 * Presentations: **3 February 2018**

# How

Please submit one (or more) 30-40 minute talk proposal(s) OR one (or
more) 10 minute lightning talk proposal(s) by **23:59 UTC on November
26th 2017**. We will notify all those submitting proposals about their
acceptance by December 15th 2017.

To submit a talk proposal (you can submit multiple proposals if you'd
like) with [Pentabarf](https://penta.fosdem.org/submission/FOSDEM18/),
the FOSDEM paper submission system. Be sure to select `Testing and
Automation` otherwise we won't see it!


You can create an account, or use an existing account if you already have one.

Please note: FOSDEM is a
[FLOSS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_and_open-source_software)
community event, by and for the community, please ensure your topic is
appropriate (i.e. this isn't the right forum for commercial product
presentations)

# Who

 * [R. Tyler Croy](https://github.com/rtyler) - Jenkins hacker
 * [Mark Waite](https://github.com/markewaite) - Jenkins/Git hacker
