---
layout: post
title: "Google Hangouts is dead, long live Google Hangouts"
tags:
- opinion
- google
---

In this post I would like to share a handy little workaround for returning to
Google Hangouts, despite Google Meet. Having narrowly escaped working at Google
via acquisitions _twice_, I have stood by and watched as the Ad Words
money-pipe funded rewrite after boondoggle after rewrite. When Google
[announced "Google
Meet"](https://techcrunch.com/2017/02/28/google-quietly-launches-meet-an-enterprise-friendly-version-of-hangouts/)
earlier this year as an "enterprise-friendly version" of Google Hangouts, I was
annoyed, but not surprised.

Google seems to be so systematically incapable of building a great product
experience, that it comes as no surprise that organizations continue to be
stuck in a weird limbo between Google Hangouts and Google Meet. Google Meet
somehow doesn't support nearly as many features as Google Hangouts, which I
guess makes it enterprise-friendlier, but it also is _broken_ in ways that
Google Hangouts is not. Screen-sharing has never worked for me on any
Linux-based browser, Chrome included, and works only to varying degrees for my
colleagues on macOS or Windows. Unlike Google Hangouts, sometimes audio and
video stop working inexplicably, requiring in some cases fully quitting the
browser. Google Meet also removed the ability to **dial-in telephones**, which
to me is a _killer_ feature for Google Hangouts; any conference phone, or
mobile user, regardless of customer site or location, I can at _least_ dial-in
via Google Hangouts. In order to bring those users into a Google Meet, they
just be using a Google account under Google Chrome.

"Enterprise-friendly."

Fortunately, like most products at Google, Google Hangouts is not fully dead.
You can still create meetings with Google Hangouts, right from within Google
Meet even!

**Here's how you get to Google Hangouts:**

![Google Meet](/images/post-images/google-hangouts/meet-screen.png)

From the main Google Meet interface, click "Use Meeting Code."

![Use Meeting Code](/images/post-images/google-hangouts/use-meeting-code.png)


Enter in a clever name, in accordance with HR guidelines and policies, and then
start your meeting.


![Viola Google Hangouts](/images/post-images/google-hangouts/hangout.png)


Oh hey, this looks familiar! From the old Hangouts interface, if you click the
little "Add Participant" icon on the left of the top bar, you can enter in a
phone number to dial-in another participant.

