---
layout: post
title: "They don't always grow right"
tags:
- garden
- croyfamilyfarms
---

This year's growing season has been the most challenging to date, partially due
to the increased square footage, but also due to events outside of my control.
Thus far: deer have devoured the tops off some of my strawberries and bush
beans. The native soil in the Sebastopol is so chock-full of grass and clover
seed that the only way the beets have had a chance has been to tediously
hand-weed the bed.  When transplants should have been soaking up sun to
kick-start growth, the weather turned and stalled growth with sporadic days of
rain. Once, it hailed in the west crop.

It has been rough.

Despite the frustrating sight of powdery mildew affecting some zucchini plants,
I try to remind myself that our run of sugar snap peas (~15ft) produced 9.5lbs
of crunchy sugar snaps. Despite the poor location I selected for the pumpkin
(too much shade) I try to remind myself that I already harvested two seedings
of radishes (~20ft). Despite disappointment at the plot of carrots becoming so
overrun with grass and clover, such that it was more time-effective to hoe it
all away and transplant some summer squash, I try to remind myself that there
are 18ft of my first ever potatoes maturing in the ground.


Most frustrating of all, my tomatoes. Many of their leaves curled, expressing
their displeasure with my soil, my watering, or something else altogether. The
first season I kept records, I harvested almost 100lbs of tomatoes from 6
highly productive plants. This year, I have no idea what to expect, if
anything.


Despite **all** of that, I try to remind myself that: I have stood in the
garden bemused as dozens of bees enjoyed the bounty of our pomegranate tree,
heavy with flowers. I have quietly watered an adjacent bed, while robins poked
around in the straw mulch, dining on all the creepy crawlies who inhabit those
little ecosystems. I have walked outside every morning, greeted by warm sun,
taller stems, and ever-broadening leaves.


Cultivating seed and soil is a non-stop roller-coaster of "failures" and
"successes." It is a humbling experience; it is not a dictation from man to the
earth but rather a collaboration of countless artists that makes for "success."

And while they don't always grow right, or how you expect them to, so long as
they're growing, there's something in the process to savor and enjoy.


(those deer however, can go straight to hell).
