---
layout: post
title: 'Running for election to the SPI board'
tags:
- spi
- opensource
---

Over the past seven years, the [Jenkins project](https://jenkins.io) has been
an associate project with an umbrella 501(c)3 organization called [Software in
the Public Interest](https://spi-inc.org) (SPI). Debian, PostgreSQL, and a
number of other [associate projects](https://spi-inc.org/projects/) utilize SPI
as a legal entity with which they can collect donations and assign intellectual
property, such as trademarks. For the past few months I have been coming up to
speed as an interim director on the board, replacing a seat vacated, but now
I'm running for the seat in the [2018 board
election](http://www.spi-inc.org/corporate/votes/2018-board-election/)

The vote is [**open**](https://members.spi-inc.org/vote/15) for contributing
members  from now until the end of July 26 (UTC).

## Position Statement

I am running for election on the SPI board to help Software in the Public
Interest continue to grow as a neutral umbrella organization for such
associated projects as Jenkins, PostgreSQL, Debian, and many others.

As part of the Jenkins project, now the Jenkins board, I have been involved
with SPI since the association of Jenkins in 2011, seeing and experiencing some
of the growing challenges facing both associated projects and SPI in the
changing open source landscape.

As an SPI board member, my primary interests and objectives are:

 * To increase responsiveness for associated projects, especially as it
   pertains to book-keeping duties.
 * Help ensure the long term continuity of operations of SPI.

Both of these I believe will be accomplished by supporting and advocating for
more part-time or full-time project management duties, rather than solely
relying on volunteer efforts, to make Software in the Public Interest "go."


## About Me

I am a long time contributor and board member of the Jenkins project, and
employed full-time arguably as a Software Developer/Engineering Manager. I have
been contributing to open source projects since I participated in the initial
Google Summer of Code (2005) with the FreeBSD project.


