---
layout: post
title: "First AIDS/LifeCycle fundraising goal: met!"
tags:
- cycling
- alc
---

This past Saturday, with support from a number of my friends, I **[passed the
first fundraising goal for AIDS/LifeCycle
2019!](http://www.tofighthiv.org/goto/rtyler)** Cue riotous applause! Prior to
my training ride I mentioned on Twitter that I was only _six dollars_ away from
my first goal, and by the time the ride was over, a couple hundred dollars had
been donated! Hoorah! Each AIDS/LifeCycle (ALC) rider must raise at least
$3,000 and thanks to the tremendous support from friends, family, and a quite a
few folks on the internet, I am _definitely_ riding from San Francisco to Los
Angeles in June.


My training thus far has mostly been
[inside](/2019/01/13/peloton-worth-the-hype.html), due to more than a few rainy
weekends this winter. But to date I've put about 220 miles in for January, and
I'm on track to exceed that in February. 

The ride over the weekend was an aggressive 75 minute "power zone" spin class,
in which I covered approximately 25 miles, but that wasn't really the goal. The
goal was to build up my endurance to sustain a certain threshold of output for
a longer period of time. While ALC is not a race, it is _long_. My legs need to
be in good enough shape to put about 6-8 hours of riding in a day, for **five
straight days**.

<center><img src="/images/post-images/alc-2019/indoor-training.jpeg"
title="Training indoors is _okay_" height="420"/></center>


With this delightfully wet Northern California winter drawing to a close, I'm
going to be heading out for more weekend outdoor rides. You'll find me in my
very fashionable lycra and riding over just about every corner of Sonoma
county before ALC in June.


While the first fundraising goal has been met, that was my **minimum**. My
target is $5,000 and if you have not already been kind enough to donate, I
would [really appreciate your support!](http://www.tofighthiv.org/goto/rtyler)**
