---
layout: post
title: "Wiederaufbau"
tags:
- opinion
---


The fire at Notre Dame is certainly unfortunate, but with President Macron
having committed to rebuilding the famed cathedral, the destruction is in no
way permanent. Restoring or building new architectural masterpieces is
expensive and challenging, but it is definitely not impossible.

Since Dresden is my second home-town, my mind jumped to "Die Frauenkirche"
(apparently "The Church of Our Lady" in English). In the morally reprehensible
[firebombing of
Dresden](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frauenkirche_(Dresden)#Zerst%C3%B6rung_der_Frauenkirche_im_Zweiten_Weltkrieg)
in 1945, the surroundings of the church were mostly burnt to the ground but the
church remained standing, burning. For almost two weeks it continued to
stand, until the fire-degraded stone gave way and the building finally
collapsed.

![Die Frauenkirche in
1973](/images/post-images/frauenkirche/frauenkirche_1973.JPG)([source](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Datei:Frauenkirche_Mai_1973.JPG))

The rubble of the building sat in Altstadt, largely undisturbed throughout the
DDR and it wasn't until after the reunification that reconstruction finally
began again in 1993. Ten years later, the rebuild had progressed far enough to
raise the new tower bells into place. I was fortunate enough to be at the
ceremony blessing the bells before they were hoisted up. The next year, the
reconstruction completed, almost 60 years after the Allied fire-bombing.


If you look closely in the picture below, you can see black stones in the
facade, which were from the original structure and still bare the charring
caused by the fire which burned at over 1200+ degrees (Celsius).

![Die Frauenkirche heute](/images/post-images/frauenkirche/frauenkirche.jpg)
([source](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Datei:Frauenkirche_Blaue_Stunde.jpg))

Fortunately the damage to Notre Dame is not nearly as severe, and I expect it
will take the French far less time to rebuild. It's a sad event, but not the
end for such a historic landmark.
