---
layout: post
title: "It is always pilot error"
tags:
- opinion
- software
- aviation
---

The aviation community has been buzzing with speculation and commentary around
the recently Boeing 737 MAX 8 plane crash in Ethiopia and the model's
subsequent grounding around the world./.
Watching [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-rmZ4r3E8_A) I was struck
by the following quote from the "Deputy Assistant Secretary of State" regarding
a similar crash in Indonesia:

> "*The plane should have never gone down if the pilot's had just been following
> procedures*"

Fundamentally, as pilot in command we take full and complete responsibility for
the fate of our aircraft and passengers every time we start the engines. So
yes, while this statement may be by-the-book correct, it is still a
**completely** irresponsible perspective in aviation safety.

Any system for which a human is solely responsible for its safe operation would
be _wildly_ reckless. Humans make so many mistakes, many of them entirely
predictable and avoidable with the appropriate checks, procedures, and
overlapping fail-safes.

The only example in my lifetime where I could make the argument that the crash
was only due to "pilot error" is the [Germanwings Flight 9525
crash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Germanwings_crash) where the co-pilot of
the aircraft deliberately smashed the aircraft into a mountain. Even then,
**systems of safety** may have prevented the crash, such as the standard
procedures followed by airlines in the US which require two individuals to
always be in the cockpit.

I think about this topic a lot when it comes to the software that we build.  It
is more and more difficult for me to call something "user error" these days,
since the problem at hand is often times easily preventable by improved
safeguards, clearer interfaces, and sane defaults. A perspective shared by
[Jordan Sissel](https://twitter.com/jordansissel) comes to mind:

> "*If a new user has a problem,
> itâ€™s a bug in the code or the documentation*"

These two lines of thought start to interleave since early indications are
pointing towards software failures contributing to the crashes of these two
aircraft and the deaths of hundreds of passengers. Perhaps it was a single
faulty sensor, or an incorrect automated overcorrection, or the pilot not being
made aware of some condition and choosing the wrong responsive action.
Ultimately _yes_, I believe we can make the claim that every crash is
ultimately the pilot's fault, but that does not release the manufacturer and
the engineers of the various systems from blame for not building safer systems
which ensure that the lives of hundreds do not depend on a single human
decision.
