---
layout: post
title: Tell your executives to sit down
tags:
- opinion
---

Over the course of my professional career I have witnessed the transition from
free and open source software being something useful engineers do, to a
multi-billion dollar industry with companies [jumping into the
frenzy](https://kohsuke.org/2019/09/19/open-core-summit-event-report/). During
this time I have also gone from an open source user, to contributor, to a
[board member](https://jenkins.io/blog/2019/09/25/board-elections). Helping to
steward a few [small projects](http://jruby-gradle.org), but mainly focusing on
the [Jenkins project](https://jenkins.io/). Along the way I have interacted
with businesses in each role, forming opinions of their businesses. Getting a
sense of their cultural values by watching and listening as their employees
interact with the project, or their executives make public statements about
Jenkins or open source software in general.  By night I am open source
contributor, but by day I am now what enterprise sales people refer to as the
"buyer." One with opinions formed by years of interactions with these companies
whose products we evaluate.


I [mentioned
recently](https://twitter.com/agentdero/status/1174766277266558976) that
Datadog's early support for the Jenkins project has certainly been a positive
long-term investment for the company. To expand on that statement a little,
exposing _me_ as a Jenkins contributor to Datadog helped cement my opinion that
the product was worth purchasing at two companies. It doesn't hurt that their
product is superb, and everybody I have ever met or interacted from the company
has been a delight. When those three things overlap, I will find myself eager
to champion a company like Datadog regardless of where I'm working.


Sponsoring an open source project is not just good karma, it's good business.


I don't think of myself as holding grudges. In a professional setting it's
completely unwarranted,. However, I would be lying if my previous experiences
with many companies through the Jenkins project and [Continuous Delivery
Foundation](https://cd.foundation/) did not bias the products and companies I
consider, but more importantly perhaps _won't_ consider. There are now
_multiple_ companies whose products I will either not consider or try to
deprecate if possible.

I'm not going to produce a list of companies who are on a "naughty list" or
anything. The poor behavior of many of these companies is
[public](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jenkins_(software)#History) and [well
documented](https://www.cloudbees.com/blog/gitlabs-confusion). The poor
behavior is less well-documented in some cases, but overall the behavior that I
most frequently see is the public [throwing of
shade](https://www.merriam-webster.com/words-at-play/shade) by executives,
marketing departments, and leaders at these companies.

Disparaging the work done by volunteers, disrespecting free and open source
communities, or attacking the [foundation upon which we build our
communities](https://opensource.org) may not
immediately affect the company's bottom line, but it will.

Negative marketing might get you some quick views but does long-term damage to
your company's reputation and trust, both of which are much harder to rebuild.

Give me reasons to buy your products and services. Don't give me, and the
others in the open source ecosystem justification to take our business
elsewhere.
