---
layout: post
title: Austria capturing the far-right zeitgeist
tags:
- opinion
---

For a myriad of reasons the only video-news I consume tends to be
German-language news out of Germany. Local or national American news tends to
be of lower quality, setting aside the [abhorrent
monopolies](https://www.teenvogue.com/story/sinclair-broadcast-group-and-media-monopolies-explained),
it always trends towards an insular world view, missing many major
international events. One such event skirting under radar of American media has
been the disintegration of the Austrian parliament after the deputy chancellor,
a member of a far-right party, was caught on video [soliciting bribes from a woman posing as a relative to a
Russian
oligarch](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/may/20/austria-ibiza-scandal-sting-operation-what-happened-why-does-it-matter).

The FPÃ–, the Austrian far-right party whose ministers have resigned, are not
"practically nazis" as far as I am concerned, founded by nazis, acting like
nazis, they _are_ nazis. Similar to their AfD brethren in Germany, I find them
to be nothing more than neo-nazis is suits, so they can pretend not to be
actual nazis.  In both countries these nazis have been softening their message
both to gain power and to pull other parties more towards the right, as has
happened with the CDU/CSU coalition in Germany.

The interesting thread that binds all these other far-right parties across
Europe together, seems to be their corruption and [Russian government
influence](https://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/german-populists-forge-deeper-ties-with-russia-a-1089562.html).
Looking further west to the United States, where Russian interference in our
2016 elections has still gone unchecked, there is [that same common
thread](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2019/mar/01/nra-russia-investigations-gun-lobby).


I think it is quite obvious that every far-right party in _any_ democracy right
now, is under Russian influence or being supported by the Russian government in
some way. While I don't expect any of these parties to disavow their
intentional or unintentional bedfellows, but it would be a striking and
improbable display of integrity.

The next few months in Austria will be an interesting small-scale experiment in
attempting to remedy the ailment that is afflicting much of the western world.
Make no mistake, there is only one country that benefits from Brexit, weakening
the EU, and undermining democracies.


nazis raus!
