---
layout: post
title: "Peloton: worth the hype."
tags:
- alc
- opinion
---

Wrapping up work some afternoon last November, I waltzed into the living room
and found myself in the middle of one of those conversations where you weren't
actually necessary for the first half. "It will be great for you to train for
[ALC](http://tofighthiv.org/goto/rtyler) too!" She continued to talk excitedly
about how we wouldn't pay for the spin studio anymore, how convenient it will
be, and how it would really be a good Christmas present. She showed me the
price and I hummed to myself, giving the appearance of stern but deliberate
thought "yeah, we'll see." Having already started to price out more cycling
equipment, I didn't want to give up the gag just yet.

In the world of cycling, everything seems to be godawful expensive, so a
[$2,300 indoor trainer](https://www.onepeloton.com/shop/bike) which we could
both get a lot of use out of, wasn't actually _that_ expensive. I wouldn't call
it cheap, but it was reasonably priced, and I quietly ordered a Peloton bike.
Without the flexibility in either of our schedules to travel to a fitness
studio or gym outside the home, the ability to get a good high-quality workout
in our living room has become increasingly important.


After a couple of months, I am nearing my 50th workout, and I can genuinely affirm
that the Peloton bike and it's corresponding digital subscription of hundreds
of spin, yoga, stretching, and strength floor classes, is **completely worth
the hype and the money**.

The last time I felt this good about a seemingly high-end product was when I
upgraded from my iBook to an Apple PowerBook and was shocked at how _good_ it
was, wholly justifying its own premium price tag.

Peloton is basically a minimal social network, coupled to a on-demand video
library sourced through an Android tablet affixed to a stationary bike. It is
not a technically complex product, but polished in all the right places to
provide an altogether positive experience.

Instructors with live classes, encouraging and challenging the leaderboard of
home and in-studio cyclists. Built in "Cast" support to display the content on
a nearby wireless-connected TV for easy transition to floor exercises.
Integration of power zones into the in-class UI to help tailor the workout to
the rider. And a variety of content trivially available through the
application.

The **only** downside we have seen thus far is that Peloton ships with
outdated [Look](https://www.lookcycle.com/en/) "Delta" pedals. These style
pedals are no longer manufactured and if you find yourself wanting to use the
same bike shoes and cleats between the Peloton and your road bike, you'll want
to buy new pedals for the Peloton.


If you're in the market for a stationary bike, I highly recommend the Peloton.
Or if you're just looking for a new home fitness product, their Peloton Digital
subscription which just provides access to their large variety of floor
classes.

---

In my training for [AIDS/LifeCycle](https://www.aidslifecycle.org/) over the
past two months I have written over 280 miles on my Peloton bike but there's a
lot further to go!

I hope you will join me, and thousands of other supporters, to end AIDS!

My donation page, and fundraising progress, can be found
**[here](http://tofighthiv.org/goto/rtyler)**.

