---
layout: post
title: Gopher it
tags:
- gopher
- opinion
---

The web is getting faster but feeling slower, something which I have
complained about loudly on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/agentdero) but now
some folks have put together [data to back it
up](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/the-need-for-speed/). The web is
simultaneously a medium to transmit documents (e.g. an article) and an
application platform (e.g. Jira). Anecdotally it seems to me like far too many
publishers think of the web only as the _latter_. There are more and more
websites which require significant JavaScript or other multimedia resources to
render what ends up being a few paragraphs of text. If you don't believe me,
just visit the website for your local television news station with
[NoScript](https://noscript.net/) turned on. In my own way, I have been
resisting this push by keeping this blog as barebones as neceessary to present
the content you're reading now. On a whim, I recently took this idea a little
bit further by deploying a [Gopher site](gopher://gopher.brokenco.de/) (viewable over HTTP via [a proxy](https://gopher.floodgap.com/gopher/gw?a=gopher%3A%2F%2Fgopher.brokenco.de)).

![gopher.brokenco.de viewed with elinks](/images/post-images/2020-gopher/gopherspace.png)

[Gopher](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gopher_(protocol)) is old, somewhat
primitive, but still captures my interest because of those qualities. By and
large I have filled up my gopher site with this blog content, a couple other
text files, and archives of some of my video presentations which I
downloaded from YouTube.

When I first started tinkering around with the idea, I was absolutely floored
by how fast content was loading via some of the Gopher sites I was visiting,
even over [Tor](https://tor-project.org) the responsiveness of sending a few
kilobytes cannot be understated.

I do not plan on publishing too much content "exclusively" via Gopher, since
HTTP is where most things on the internet are happening these days. I have
however set up an automatic publishing pipeline for my blog and other content
to automatically go to [gopher.brokenco.de](gopher://gopher.brokenco.de) once
it has been committed.

Personally I find [elinks](http://elinks.or.cz/) to be a good Gopher client,
though others [do exist](https://github.com/xvxx/phetch). If you're interested
in exploring some of the content that lives on the interview via Gopher, I
recommend starting at [gopherproject.org](gopher://gopherproject.org). Have
fun! :)

