---
layout: post
title: Loving the PinePower
tags:
- hardware
---

My current available working space is at an all time low which has made the
dimensions of everything around me much more important.  While I can never
become one of those extreme minimalists that works with only their laptop on a
park bench, next to their camper van (or whatever), I have been pushing myself
to become more space-efficient with my electronics. This includes how they all
are powered, so when I learned about the
[PinePower](https://pine64.com/product/pinepower-120w-desktop-power-supply-us-version/?v=0446c16e2e66)
device, I ordered it immediately.

The PinePower is sold by [Pine64](https://pine64.com/), the same folks who
manufactured my PineBook Pro. The device is basically a "power all the USB from
one place" desktop power supply. One 120V plug provides five USB ports (four
USB-A, one USB-C) along with a charging pad, although I own nothing that can
utilize wireless charging.

Currently this little brick is powering:

* Dell XPS via USB-C
* PineBook Pro
* A work phone
* My personal phone, using the USB-A port with Quick Charging capability.

Consolidating four "wall warts" into a single 120V plug is more than enough of
a reason to purchase the device when it becomes available again. 

The PinePower also offers a little display above each port which tells you the
voltage and current amperage of each port. I *love* this feature as it gives me
a good understanding of the power draw of all of these devices, when charging
has completed, or when CPU intensive tasks have caused power consumption to
spike. At a glance I can see that my PineBook Pro is charging, pulling 2.2A,
while the XPS is fluctuating power modes between 0.4, 0.7, and 1.2A as I write
this blog post. Power utilization and efficiency are important to me, and to
that end the PinePower has been more informative than I anticipated it would
be.

From an excitement-to-complexity ratio, the device scores very highly for me.
It's so simple, yet I find myself glancing over at the display multiple times a
day to get a sense of my current power requirements.

To learn more about it, I recommend [reading this
article](https://www.cnx-software.com/2021/01/16/pinepower-120w-desktop-power-supply-features-display-usb-pd-qc-3-0-and-wireless-charging/)
on the PinePower, and of course keep an eye on the website to see when it comes
back in stock!
